# 

Here, I'd like to share a few ideas relating to mental health and communication in science environments. These are just my own observations, the sort of things that I wish that someone made explicit to me years ago as I moved from "the east" to "the west". I am not exactly sure why I am writing this, perhaps because I am often reminded that we can still do better, despite some improvements in these areas. 

**Inclusivity** 

*Listening* 

Much of what I am about to say is will be trivial to many. The sort of thing that is self-evident and not even worth mentioning. However, I believe that a daily reminder is in order. A daily reminder that our own background and the culture of science are *not* what most people in the world experience. A certain type of communication might seem the only appropriate one to us, however, to a person from another side of the planet (or a neighbouring town as a matter of fact!), this is just *one of the many* plausible ways to express a comment/question. I think it is our job to listen, make an effort to clarify, to explain the trivial, even if it means that we get 30 mins less for our "actual work". I think most people would agree with this point, *to a degree* and *in principle* at least. In practice, we might often be too busy to really listen. This is not surprising, the incentives that we face in academia are somwhere else, analyses must be coded, papers written, grants submitted. I would, however, argue that the *time* it takes to talk to a person is time *better* spent and that it in fact does not constitute "excessive time burden" that our brain might be trying to tell us. Perhaps this is just my experience, but a single conversation or an act of understanding can easily turn the course of one's life. Let me follow with a personal anecdote. While I was a second year bachelor student at Aberystwyth working in McDonald's for 5.67/hr, we had a professor visiting from a bigger university where they did "actual research". He gave a talk one day, after which I came to him and asked a question. Next day, while climbing the unforgiving Penglais hill, the professor stopped and offered me a lift to the department. On the way, he also invited me to come over to his lab and learn more about neuroscience and psychology research. I was shocked, I didn't know professors had time to interact with students in such personal way, yet, it completely shifted my vision of what was possible. Suddenly, there existed a possibility that what I have been reading about in books could be my life. Without a doubt, the fact that he made that decision to stop (on a [double red](https://www.highwaycodeuk.co.uk/road-markings.html) btw :p) enabled me to later do my first EEG project, go to US, Oxford, etc. etc. Unfortunately, this is a one in hundred experience that I have had with professors. Also while a bachelor student, I had the opportunity to attended several dinners with "very famous and prominent" scientists. On nearly every single one of them, I made an "inappropriate" or "illogical" comment/joke. These would not necessary be inappropriate/illogical, but because of language and cultural barriers the essence of what I was trying to say either didn't come across, it lacked nuance and cultural context. What stuck with me the most is the reaction I would get from people. Apart from the general awkwardness, there was a noticeable displeasure/anger from seniority. You can imagine how does an insecure student feel when the big professor is displeased with them. Of course, most insteractions fall somewhere in between the two. The point that I am tryng to make is that every conversation (or situation) is important, and it is crucial to be midful of a person, the situation, context. 
I gave the example of being a student, but I think this is equally true for all interactions. It concerns other situations such as group dynamics. A good example that keeps popping up is the "going for lunch" situation. Groups tend to go together. In Oxford, students/postdocs would sit in a open plan area mixed across groups. I remember the daily theater of individual groups trying to find their members and go for lunch together while people from small groups or visiting researchers easily ended up having 180/200 meals alone. I am not saying that one has to sacrifice their work for any of this, I just want to highlight that a tad more mindfulness can go very far, and that, in fact, it will very likely make the "science" better. 



**Understanding** 
Life of every individual is different. Just because I have a conception of what it is to be human does not guarantee that I understand what another person is experiencing. Following from my previous point, it is very simple to apply one's own mental models to what a person is telling us, dismissing what we are actually being told in the process. I think it requires constant awareness and midfulness, it's probably what our brains  

**Openness**
Not the kind of openness "I only got 3 out of 10 top-tier multi-mill grants"
people who are completely different publically and privately 

